---
title: Everything You Need To Know About A Leaky Roof
layout: post
image: https://i.imgur.com/Byas2xU.jpg
permalink: /everything-you-need-to-know-about-a-leaky-roof
---

<h1><span style="font-weight: 400;">Everything You Need To Know About A Leaky Roof</span></h1> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Roof leaks are a common issue, especially if you own a home with an older roof.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">So, if you&rsquo;ve noticed a leak in your commercial or residential roof, don&rsquo;t panic! As long as you act fast and call in a <a href="https://level1roofing.com/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Loomis roofing contractor</a> right away, that leak won&rsquo;t turn into a serious problem.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The rest of this post will tell you everything you need to know about roof leaks and how to prevent them.&nbsp;</span></p> <h2><span style="font-weight: 400;">Causes of roof leaks</span></h2> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">There are several factors that can cause a roof to leak. A few of the most common include:&nbsp;</span></p> <p><strong>Shingle damage: </strong><span style="font-weight: 400;">Slipping, cracked, or missing shingles can let moisture into your roof when it rains. If you ever notice shingle damage on your roof &mdash; even if it seems like no big deal &mdash; call a <a href="https://level1roofing.com/residential-roofing-company-loomis-ca/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">California residential roofer</a> to check it out.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><strong>Water pooling on flat roofs: </strong><span style="font-weight: 400;">If your home has a flat roof, it will collect moisture over time. Those puddles add unnecessary weight and will eventually leak through. That's why it's so important to inspect and clean off your flat roof at least once a month.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><strong>Attic condensation: </strong><span style="font-weight: 400;">Condensation in your attic can damage your roof&rsquo;s internal structure and cause a leak. If you run your heater often in the winter, you should inspect your attic for condensation whenever you have the chance.&nbsp;</span></p> <h2><span style="font-weight: 400;">How to fix them</span></h2> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Repairing a roof leak is usually a quick, easy job. In most cases, a contractor will just need to find the source of the leak and patch or replace the damaged area.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">However, if you let the leak go ignored for too long, it can lead to much more serious (and expensive) problems. Water damage to a roof could eventually cause it to sag or even collapse &mdash; so don&rsquo;t hesitate to call for repairs as soon as possible.&nbsp;</span></p> <h2><span style="font-weight: 400;">How to prevent them&nbsp;</span></h2> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The best way to prevent roof leaks is with routine maintenance and regular inspections.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Call your <a href="https://level1roofing.com/commercial-roofing-company-loomis-ca/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">local roofing company</a> to learn more. As long as you spot and repair roof damage quickly, you should be able to keep your home safe and dry all year long. </span></p> 
