---
title: Common Signs Of Septic Damage
layout: post
image: https://i.imgur.com/EyW0A0n.jpg
permalink: /common-signs-of-septic-damage
---

<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Residential and <a href="https://www.nexgenseptics.com/septic-systems-penryn-ca/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">commercial septic systems</a> are built to last. It&rsquo;s rare that a homeowner will have to replace or repair the septic on their property.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But septic damage can happen, especially in older systems. It&rsquo;s important to watch for signs of an issue with your septic system, so you know when you need to call for repairs.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">With that in mind, here are a few common signs of septic damage you should watch for.&nbsp;</span></p> <h2><span style="font-weight: 400;">1. Weak flushing</span></h2> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Have you noticed that the toilets in your home or building are flushing a little slower than usual? That&rsquo;s a good sign that something has gone wrong with your septic.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Leaks, clogs, and cracks in the pipes or septic tank can affect the flushing power of your toilets. If you notice this problem in your home, call a <a href="https://www.nexgenseptics.com/septic-systems-loomis-ca/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">residential septic engineer</a> right away.&nbsp;</span></p> <h2><span style="font-weight: 400;">2. Odor</span></h2> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">If your septic starts to smell&hellip; well, like septic &mdash; something has gone wrong.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Septic tanks can develop cracks or leaks when they&rsquo;re put under stress. That can be caused by shifting grounds over time, plant growth, or even by heavy vehicles parked on top of them.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">When your septic tank starts to leak, you&rsquo;ll notice a smell around your home. This is generally a sign of serious damage, so don&rsquo;t put off calling the best local septic company in your area.&nbsp;</span></p> <h2><span style="font-weight: 400;">3. Pooling water</span></h2> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">When serious damage occurs to your septic system, like a burst pipe or a crack in the tank, you might see water coming up from underground.&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">If you do see a sudden puddle in your yard, don&rsquo;t touch it &mdash; it&rsquo;s probably wastewater. Stop using your septic system and call a septic repair company as soon as possible.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">In most cases, a leak of that size means that your septic tank needs to be completely replaced.</span></p> <h2><span style="font-weight: 400;">When in doubt, call a professional!</span></h2> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">If you ever notice anything unusual related to your septic, the safest thing to do is bring in a <a href="https://www.nexgenseptics.com/septic-systems-roseville-ca/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">local septic company</a>.&nbsp;</span></p> <p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It&rsquo;s always worth it to make sure your septic system is functioning safely and reliably &mdash; otherwise, you might find yourself dealing with a more expensive problem later on down the road.&nbsp;</span></p> 
